The goal of this project is to visualize how historic redlining in Baltimore city has resulted in a racially- and socioeconomically-segregated landscape. More specifically, I’ve created outputs that display how these once redlined areas have impacted racial makeup of certain communities and the abundance and locations of public housing projects throughout Baltimore.

For my outputs, I used Home Owner’s Land Corporation (HOLC) data of previously redlined areas of Baltimore. In the 1930s, redlined areas were assigned to different rankings, A, B, C, and D, with A being a “good” area and D being a “bad” area. Mortgage lenders would use these rankings as a basis to refuse loans to people living there. These rankings are documented in the shapefile under the attribute “holc_grade.” 2010 Census block data was also used. The attributes “pop” and “pp_nhbl” will be used to find the percentage of black people per census block. I will also be using point data of public housing projects in Baltimore from 1940, 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000. This data contains points for each project, as well as attributes on the demographic of each project. This point data was duplicated from maps created by the ACLU.

I used the areal-weighted interpolation of polygon data in R to combine the data from each census block within a redlined area with the redline data. From here, I was able to calculate the percentage of black residents per redlined area. For the public housing point data, outside sources were used to create points for each project. This involved research and manual input of points for each decade from 1940 to 2010.

My first output is a map showing what percentage of the 2010 population in each historically redlined area is black. Each redlined area is labeled with it’s HOLC ranking and is symbolized based on what percent of the total population is black. My second output is a GIF showing public housing projects in spatial relation to redlined areas and their severity from 1940 to 2010. The points are symbolized showing their racial composition, and the redlined areas are symbolized based on their HOLC ranking. 
